Query tips doc (#14922)
apache/druid: docs/querying/tips-good-queries.md

- GROUP BY on one dimension, and
- ORDER BY on one aggregate.

 See [TopN queries](./topnquery.md) for more information.

Note that TopN queries are approximate in that each data process ranks its top K results and only returns those top K results to the Broker.

You can follow the tutorial [Using TopN approximation in Druid queries](https://github.com/apache/druid/blob/master/examples/quickstart/jupyter-notebooks/notebooks/03-query/02-approxRanking.ipynb) to work through some examples with approximation turned on and off. The tutorial [Get to know query view](../tutorials/tutorial-sql-query-view.md) demonstrates running aggregate queries in the Druid console.

### Manually tune your queries

This section outlines techniques you can use to improve your query accuracy and performance.

#### Query one table at a time

Query a single table at a time to minimize the load on the Druid processor.

#### Select specific columns

Only select the columns needed for the query instead of retrieving all columns from the table. This reduces the amount of data retrieved from the database, which improves query performance.

#### Use filters

> Use filters, for example the WHERE clause, and filter on time. Avoid using non-equal filters because they're very resource-intensive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use filters, such as the WHERE clause, and filter on time. Avoid using non-equal filters because they're very resource-intensive.
```

Avoid grouping on a high cardinality column, for example user ID. Investigate whether you can filter on user ID first. Find out whether your dataset is already partitioned by user ID.

#### Query at a lower granularity

Consider whether you can query at a lower granularity to return a smaller results set.

For example, the following query doesn't limit on time and could be resource-intensive:

```
SELECT cust_id, sum(revenue) FROM myDatasource
GROUP BY cust_id
```

This query could be split into multiple queries over smaller time spans, with the results combined client-side. For example:

```
SELECT cust_id, sum(revenue) FROM myDatasource
GROUP BY cust_id
WHERE __time BETWEEN '2023-07-01' AND '2023-07-31'

SELECT cust_id, sum(revenue) FROM myDatasource
GROUP BY cust_id
WHERE __time BETWEEN '2023-08-01' AND '2023-08-31'
```

#### Reduce the computation in your queries

Examine your query to see if it uses a lot of transformation, functions, and expressions. Consider whether you could rewrite the query to reduce the level of computation.

## Druid SQL query example

The following example query demonstrates many of the tips outlined in this topic.
The query:

> - selects specific dimensions and metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- selects specific dimensions and metrics
```

> - uses approximation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- uses approximation
```

> - selects from a single table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- selects from a single table
```

> - groups by low cardinality columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- groups by low cardinality columns
```

> - filters on both dimensions and time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- filters on both dimensions and time
```

> - orders by a dimension and a measure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- orders by a dimension and a measure
```

> - includes a limit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- includes a limit
```

#### Turn on query caching

You can enable caching in Druid to improve query times for frequently accessed data. Caching enables increased concurrency on the same system, leading to noticeable performance improvements for queries handling throughput for concurrent, mixed workloads.

The largest performance gains from caching tend to apply to TopN and time series queries. For GroupBy queries, if the bottleneck is in the merging phase on the Broker, enabling caching results in little noticeable query improvement. See [Performance considerations for caching](./caching.md#performance-considerations-for-caching) for more information.

#### Use approximation

When possible, design your SQL queries in such a way that they match the rules for TopN approximation, so that Druid enables TopN by default. For Druid to automatically optimize for TopN, your SQL query must include the following:

- GROUP BY on one dimension, and
- ORDER BY on one aggregate.

 See [TopN queries](./topnquery.md) for more information.

Note that TopN queries are approximate in that each data process ranks its top K results and only returns those top K results to the Broker.

> You can follow the tutorial [Using TopN approximation in Druid queries](https://github.com/apache/druid/blob/master/examples/quickstart/jupyter-notebooks/notebooks/03-query/02-approxRanking.ipynb) to work through some examples with approximation turned on and off. The tutorial [Get to know query view](../tutorials/tutorial-sql-query-view.md) demonstrates running aggregate queries in the Druid console.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can follow the tutorial [Using TopN approximation in Druid queries](https://github.com/apache/druid/blob/master/examples/quickstart/jupyter-notebooks/notebooks/03-query/02-approxRanking.ipynb) to work through some examples with approximation turned on and off. The tutorial [Get to know Query view](../tutorials/tutorial-sql-query-view.md) demonstrates running aggregate queries in the Druid console.
```

### Manually tune your queries

This section outlines techniques you can use to improve your query accuracy and performance.

#### Query one table at a time

Query a single table at a time to minimize the load on the Druid processor.

#### Select specific columns

Only select the columns needed for the query instead of retrieving all columns from the table. This reduces the amount of data retrieved from the database, which improves query performance.

#### Use filters

> Use filters, for example the WHERE clause, and filter on time. Try to minimize the use of non-equal filters, because they're very resource-intensive.

Reviewer 2: "non-equal" -- maybe "inequality", if you're referring to lesser than or greater than

The following example query filters on `__time` and `product`:

```
SELECT
  FLOOR(__time to day),
  product,
  sum(quantity * price) as revenue
FROM "orders"
WHERE
  __time > '2023-08-20' and product = 'product 1'
GROUP BY 1, 2
```

The following example uses a wildcard filter on the `diffUrl` column:

```
SELECT * from Wikipedia
WHERE diffUrl LIKE 'https://en.wikipedia%'

> AND __time BETWEEN '2016-06-27 00:00' AND '2016-06-27 12:00'

Reviewer 2: The docs recommend against using SQL BETWEEN for time:
>Druid supports the standard SQL BETWEEN operator, but we recommend avoiding it for time filters. BETWEEN is inclusive of its upper bound, which makes it awkward to write time filters correctly. For example, the equivalent of TIME_IN_INTERVAL(__time, '2000-01-01/2000-02-01') is __time BETWEEN TIMESTAMP '2000-01-01 00:00:00' AND TIMESTAMP '2000-01-31 23:59:59.999'.

https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/querying/sql-scalar#date-and-time-functions

Consider something like `TIME_IN_INTERVAL(__time, '2016-06-27/2016-06-27')`. However, when I tested this in a separate environment, I also needed `TIME_PARSE`.

Reviewer 2: Applies to example at bottom of doc as well

Author: Updated to an example that works for me - against Wikipedia sample data:
```
SELECT * from Wikipedia
WHERE diffUrl LIKE 'https://en.wikipedia%'
AND TIME_IN_INTERVAL(__time, '2016-06-27T01:00:00/2016-06-27T02:00:00')
```

Author: Also updated example at bottom of doc.

```

#### Shorten your queries

Make your queries shorter where possible&mdash;Druid processes shorter queries faster. You might also be able to divide a single query into multiple queries.

For example, the following query aggregates over multiple datasources using UNION ALL:

```
SELECT id, SUM(revenue) FROM
   (SELECT id, revenue from datasource_1
UNION ALL
  SELECT id, revenue FROM datasource_2)
...
UNION ALL
   SELECT id, revenue FROM datasource_n)
GROUP BY id
```

> To simply this query, you could split it into several queries and then aggregate the results. For example:

Reviewer 2: This example doesn't show the aggregation does it? Is that a manual step the user takes after running the following queries?

Author: Yes - updated wording to make this clearer.

```
SELECT id, SUM(revenue) FROM datasource_1

SELECT id, SUM(revenue) FROM datasource_2
...
SELECT id, SUM(revenue) FROM datasource_n
```

#### Minimize or remove subqueries

> Consider whether you can pre-compute a subquery task and store it as a join or make it a part of the datasource.

Reviewer 2: Further explanation, links to relevant docs, and/or examples would be helpful here

Author: Added a couple of links to more information and examples.

#### Consider alternatives to GroupBy

Consider using Timeseries and TopN as alternatives to GroupBy. See [GroupBy queries: alternatives](./groupbyquery.md#alternatives) for more information.

> Avoid grouping on a high cardinality column, for example user ID. Investigate whether you can filter on user ID first. Find out whether your dataset is already partitioned by user ID. See [Partitioning](../ingestion/partitioning.md) for information on configuring paritioning.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph reads a bit odd. How do the points relate -- what is the takeaway if you CAN filter on user ID. If your dataset is partitioned, does that mean you can group on it?

Also typo in "partitioning" in the end of the sentence

Author: I don't think this part made much sense - removed the reference to partitioning here.

#### Query over smaller intervals

Consider whether you can query a smaller time interval to return a smaller results set.

For example, the following query doesn't limit on time and could be resource-intensive:

```
SELECT cust_id, sum(revenue) FROM myDatasource
GROUP BY cust_id
```

This query could be split into multiple queries over smaller time spans, with the results combined client-side. For example:

```
SELECT cust_id, sum(revenue) FROM myDatasource
GROUP BY cust_id
WHERE __time BETWEEN '2023-07-01' AND '2023-07-31'

SELECT cust_id, sum(revenue) FROM myDatasource
GROUP BY cust_id
WHERE __time BETWEEN '2023-08-01' AND '2023-08-31'
```

#### Reduce the computation in your queries

> Examine your query to see if it uses a lot of transformation, functions, and expressions. Consider whether you could rewrite the query to reduce the level of computation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Examine your query to see if it uses a lot of transformations, functions, and expressions. Consider whether you could rewrite the query to reduce the level of computation.
```
Consider an example here

#### Use filters

Use filters, for example the WHERE clause, and filter on time. Try to minimize the use of inequality filters, because they're very resource-intensive.

The following example query filters on `__time` and `product`:

```
SELECT
  FLOOR(__time to day),
  product,
  sum(quantity * price) as revenue
FROM "orders"
WHERE
  __time > '2023-08-20' and product = 'product 1'
GROUP BY 1, 2
```

The following example uses a wildcard filter on the `diffUrl` column:

```
SELECT * from Wikipedia
WHERE diffUrl LIKE 'https://en.wikipedia%'
AND TIME_IN_INTERVAL(__time, '2016-06-27T01:00:00/2016-06-27T02:00:00')
```

#### Shorten your queries

Make your queries shorter where possible&mdash;Druid processes shorter queries faster. You might also be able to divide a single query into multiple queries.

For example, the following query aggregates over multiple datasources using UNION ALL:

```
SELECT id, SUM(revenue) FROM
   (SELECT id, revenue from datasource_1
UNION ALL
  SELECT id, revenue FROM datasource_2)
...
UNION ALL
   SELECT id, revenue FROM datasource_n)
GROUP BY id
```

> To simply this query, you could split it into several queries, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To simplify this query, you could split it into several queries, for example:
```
